README.md, before:

# Napkin Calculator

> Real-time back-of-the-envelope math for system design interviews — without the napkin.

Napkin Calculator is a desktop tool that lets you punch in a traffic rate, payload size,
or storage volume in **any** unit and instantly see the converted results across every
time window and data magnitude. No more fumbling with zeros on a whiteboard.

## Why?

During a system design interview you're expected to toss out estimates like
*"that's roughly 120 requests per second"* or *"about 1.5 PB per year"*.
Doing that mental arithmetic under pressure is error-prone.
Napkin Calculator keeps the math honest while you keep talking.

## Download

Pre-built executables for all platforms are available on the
[Releases](https://github.com/andybrandt/napkin-calc/releases/latest) page —
no Python installation required.

| Platform | File |
|----------|------|
| Linux (x86-64) | `napkin-calc` |
| Windows | `napkin-calc.exe` |
| macOS (Apple Silicon) | `napkin-calc-macos` |

> **macOS note:** The binary is not code-signed. On first run, right-click the file
> and choose **Open** to bypass the Gatekeeper warning.

> **Linux note:** Mark the binary as executable before running:
> ```bash
> chmod +x napkin-calc
> ./napkin-calc
> ```

## Features

| Feature | Description |
|---------|-------------|
| **Traffic & Throughput Engine** | Enter a rate in any time unit (per sec / min / hr / d / mo / y) — all others update instantly. |
| **Data Volume Modeler** | Combine payload size with traffic rate to project storage over days, months, or years. |
| **Bidirectional Calculation** | Lock any one of Rate, Payload, or Total Volume — the other two recalculate automatically. |
| **Delay-Bandwidth Product** | Calculate network buffer sizes from bandwidth and round-trip time. |
| **Reference Tables** | Built-in HA "nines" availability targets and storage/memory latency cheat sheet. |
| **Talking Points** | Auto-generated human-friendly summaries (*"~3.6 billion per year"*) you can read aloud mid-interview. |
| **Exact / Estimate toggle** | Switch between precise binary math (1 KB = 1,024 B) and rounded napkin-friendly numbers (1 KB = 1,000 B). |
| **Scientific notation** | Large values show their power-of-ten alongside the number, e.g. *1,000,000 (10^6)*. |
| **Scenario Save / Load** | Persist the full calculator state to a `.npkn` file and reload it later. |
| **Light / Dark theme** | Toggle between themes at any time. |
| **Responsive layout** | Widens into a two-column layout when the window is large enough. |

## Running from Source

```bash
# Create and activate a virtual environment
python3 -m venv .venv
source .venv/bin/activate    # Linux / macOS
# .venv\Scripts\activate     # Windows

# Install (with dev dependencies for testing)
pip install -e ".[dev]"

# Launch
napkin-calc
```

## Running Tests

```bash
python -m pytest tests/ -v
```

## Building a Single Executable

```bash
pip install "nuitka[onefile]"
python -m nuitka \
    --standalone \
    --onefile \
    --enable-plugin=pyside6 \
    --include-data-files=src/napkin_calc/resources/icon.png=napkin_calc/resources/icon.png \
    --output-filename=napkin-calc \
    src/napkin_calc/main.py
```

## Tech Stack

- **Python 3.12+**
- **PySide6 (Qt 6)** for the desktop UI
- **Decimal** arithmetic throughout — no floating-point drift on large numbers
- **Nuitka** for single-file executable packaging

## License

MIT

Commit message:

Add PowerShell launcher script and update README with Windows run instructions

README.md, after:

# Napkin Calculator

> Real-time back-of-the-envelope math for system design interviews — without the napkin.

Napkin Calculator is a desktop tool that lets you punch in a traffic rate, payload size,
or storage volume in **any** unit and instantly see the converted results across every
time window and data magnitude. No more fumbling with zeros on a whiteboard.

## Why?

During a system design interview you're expected to toss out estimates like
*"that's roughly 120 requests per second"* or *"about 1.5 PB per year"*.
Doing that mental arithmetic under pressure is error-prone.
Napkin Calculator keeps the math honest while you keep talking.

## Download

Pre-built executables for all platforms are available on the
[Releases](https://github.com/andybrandt/napkin-calc/releases/latest) page —
no Python installation required.

| Platform | File |
|----------|------|
| Linux (x86-64) | `napkin-calc` |
| Windows | `napkin-calc.exe` |
| macOS (Apple Silicon) | `napkin-calc-macos` |

> **macOS note:** The binary is not code-signed. On first run, right-click the file
> and choose **Open** to bypass the Gatekeeper warning.

> **Linux note:** Mark the binary as executable before running:
> ```bash
> chmod +x napkin-calc
> ./napkin-calc
> ```

## Features

| Feature | Description |
|---------|-------------|
| **Traffic & Throughput Engine** | Enter a rate in any time unit (per sec / min / hr / d / mo / y) — all others update instantly. |
| **Data Volume Modeler** | Combine payload size with traffic rate to project storage over days, months, or years. |
| **Bidirectional Calculation** | Lock any one of Rate, Payload, or Total Volume — the other two recalculate automatically. |
| **Delay-Bandwidth Product** | Calculate network buffer sizes from bandwidth and round-trip time. |
| **Reference Tables** | Built-in HA "nines" availability targets and storage/memory latency cheat sheet. |
| **Talking Points** | Auto-generated human-friendly summaries (*"~3.6 billion per year"*) you can read aloud mid-interview. |
| **Exact / Estimate toggle** | Switch between precise binary math (1 KB = 1,024 B) and rounded napkin-friendly numbers (1 KB = 1,000 B). |
| **Scientific notation** | Large values show their power-of-ten alongside the number, e.g. *1,000,000 (10^6)*. |
| **Scenario Save / Load** | Persist the full calculator state to a `.npkn` file and reload it later. |
| **Light / Dark theme** | Toggle between themes at any time. |
| **Responsive layout** | Widens into a two-column layout when the window is large enough. |

## Running from Source

### Windows (PowerShell)

A convenience script is included that handles first-time setup automatically:

```powershell
.\run.ps1
```

On the first run it creates a `.venv` virtual environment and installs all dependencies.
Subsequent runs just launch the app directly.

If PowerShell blocks the script due to execution policy, run this once:

```powershell
Set-ExecutionPolicy -ExecutionPolicy RemoteSigned -Scope CurrentUser
```

### Linux / macOS

```bash
# Create and activate a virtual environment
python3 -m venv .venv
source .venv/bin/activate

# Install (with dev dependencies for testing)
pip install -e ".[dev]"

# Launch
napkin-calc
```

## Running Tests

```bash
python -m pytest tests/ -v
```

## Building a Single Executable

```bash
pip install "nuitka[onefile]"
python -m nuitka \
    --standalone \
    --onefile \
    --enable-plugin=pyside6 \
    --include-data-files=src/napkin_calc/resources/icon.png=napkin_calc/resources/icon.png \
    --output-filename=napkin-calc \
    src/napkin_calc/main.py
```

## Tech Stack

- **Python 3.12+**
- **PySide6 (Qt 6)** for the desktop UI
- **Decimal** arithmetic throughout — no floating-point drift on large numbers
- **Nuitka** for single-file executable packaging

## License

MIT
